


# Lecture 9 Exercise


In the last lecture we considered classical effects that have a sensible NR limit. Now, we consider a different type of classical effects where the NR limit does not apply, namely the gravitational effects on light. Specifically, we will consider two classic observable effects, the light bending and Shapiro delay. Also, we will briefly consider gravitational light-by-light scattering, which is too tiny an effect to be seen in reality but nevertheless fun to think about.

**§1 Light Bending & Shapiro Delay**

Famously, the light bending was first confirmed experimentally by observing the light of a distant star. When the light gets close to the sun, its path will be bent by the gravitational field of the sun.

Thinking in terms of scattering amplitude, the above picture corresponds to, again, a $2\to 2$ scattering between a very heavy particle $m\sim M_{\odot}$ and a photon. Clearly, $M_{\odot} \gg M_{\rm Pl}$ is way beyond the cutoff scale of any sensible relativistic quantum field theory in fixed Minkowski spacetime. So, why does it make sense at all to consider this process with scattering amplitudes?

The answer is that we are considering a classical limit. The light bending features small-angle scattering and large impact parameter $b$ (compared to the photon's wavelength $\lambda$ and also to the Compton wavelength of the sun, $1/M_{\odot}$). This corresponds to the regime where $J \sim E v r \sim b/\lambda \gg 1$. So there is no particle-number changing process at leading order, and we can again use single-particle description with classical dynamics.

As mentioned before, both NR and classical limits can be understood as kinematic limits. However, taking the classical limit is technically more involved than the NR limit, because the classical limit is ultimately an asymptotic limit. This is very easily seen from the path-integral representation:

$$
\int dx(t) e^{iS[x]/\hbar} \to e^{iS_{\rm cl}[x]/\hbar}.
\tag{1}
$$

So, to recover classical predictions, such as light bending angle and time delay, we need to make sure that the classical approximation (saddle approximation) does work, and then look for the parameters controlling the saddle-point of the path integral.

We will temporarily forget about photon spin and come back to it later, so that we can focus on the classical limit without considering the technical details of nonzero spin. So, we consider the deflection and delay of a "scalar photon beam" $\gamma$ by the gravitational field generated by a "heavy scalar field" $\phi$ of mass $m$. (Again, in reality, $m = M_{\odot}$, photon wavelength $\omega^{-1} \sim 1\mu$m and the impact parameter $b \gtrsim R_{\odot} \sim 10^{9}$ m. So it's important to bear in mind that $b \gg G_{N} M_{\odot} \gg \omega^{-1}$.)

**From the phase shift to classical physics** The scattering process still begins with a two-particle initial state. In the CoM frame, it is $|\{\phi(\vec{p})\gamma(-\vec{p})\}^{+}\rangle$. Since the particle number is conserved in the classical limit, the out state is also a two-particle state $|\{\phi(\vec{p}')\gamma(-\vec{p}')\}^{-}\rangle$. The $S$-operator is closed in the two-particle subspace, and the $S$-matrix is:

$$
S(\sqrt{s},\theta) \equiv \langle\{\phi(\vec{p}')\gamma(-\vec{p}')\}^{-} | \{\phi(\vec{p})\gamma(-\vec{p})\}^{+}\rangle.
\tag{2}
$$

Again, $|\vec{p}| = |\vec{p}'|$ and we define $\vec{q} = \vec{p} - \vec{p}'$. The deflection angle $\theta$, always defined to be positive, then satisfies $\cos\theta = \hat{p} \cdot \hat{p}'$. When $\theta \ll 1$, we have $\theta \simeq |\vec{q}|/|\vec{p}|$. Also, we choose the coordinates such that $\vec{q}$ is in $x$ direction.

Within the two-particle subspace under consideration, we can further diagonalize the $S$-matrix by using the two conserved quantities: the CoM energy $E_{\rm CM} = \sqrt{-(p_{1} + p_{2})^{2}}$ with $p_{1}^{\mu} = (\sqrt{m^{2} + \vec{p}^{2}}, \vec{p})$ and $p_{2}^{\mu} = (|\vec{p}|, -\vec{p})$, and the total angular momentum $J$. While the two-particle state $|\phi(\vec{p})\gamma(-\vec{p})\rangle$ is an energy eigenstate with CoM energy $E_{\rm CM}$, it is not a $J$-eigenstate. So we need to project it to $J$-eigenstate, written as $|E_{\rm CM}, \ell, n\rangle$, where $\ell$ is the angular number and $n$ collects all other quantum numbers. This amounts to take the partial-wave expansion of the $S$-matrix:

$$
\begin{cases}
S_{\ell}(E_{\rm CM}) = \displaystyle\frac{1}{N} \int_{-1}^{+1} d\cos\theta\; P_{\ell}(\cos\theta) S(E_{\rm CM},\theta), \\[10pt]
S(E_{\rm CM},\theta) = \displaystyle\frac{N}{2} \sum_{\ell=0}^{\infty} (2\ell+1) P_{\ell}(\cos\theta) S_{\ell}(E_{\rm CM}),
\end{cases}
\tag{3}
$$

with $N = 8\pi E_{\rm CM}/|\vec{p}|$ from normalization of states. Now, since $S$ is closed and unitary in this subspace, we know that each diagonal element $S_{\ell}$ is a pure phase with a proper normalization of states:

$$
S_{\ell}(E_{\rm CM}) = e^{i\chi_{\ell}(E_{\rm CM})},
\tag{4}
$$

Here the phase shift $\chi_{\ell}(E_{\rm CM})$ is real. At higher orders in $1/b$ where the particle-changing process has nonnegligible probability, $\chi_{\ell}$ can develop an imaginary part.

The projection to $\ell$-basis allows us to take the classical limit $\ell \to \infty$. We are also interested in small-angle deflection with $\theta \ll 1$. In these limits,

$$
P_{\ell}(\cos\theta) \simeq J_{0}(J\theta) = \int_{0}^{2\pi} \frac{dz}{2\pi} e^{iJ\theta\cos z},\quad {\rm with}\; J = \sqrt{\ell(\ell+1)} \simeq \ell.
\tag{5}
$$

Also, the impact parameter $b$ can be defined as $b \equiv J/p = \sqrt{\ell(\ell+1)}/p$, so we can change the variable $\ell \to b$ and write $\chi_{\ell}(E_{\rm CM})$ as $\chi(E_{\rm CM}, b)$.

To see how the classical parameters emerge from the phase shift, let us prepare a wave-packet initial state with the CoM energy sharply peaked at $\bar{E}$ and angular momentum $\bar{\ell} \gg 1$:

$$
|g^{+}\rangle = \int dE_{\rm CM} \sum_{\ell,n} g_{\ell,n}(E_{\rm CM}) |\{E_{\rm CM},\ell,n\}^{+}\rangle.
\tag{6}
$$

The $g$ function is chosen such that it describes two particles well localized in space with almost fixed direction ($\vec{p} = p\hat{z}$ and $-\vec{p} = -p\hat{z}$). In the classical region, after the scattering, we expect that the outgoing particles still travels in almost fixed directions ($\vec{p}'$ and $-\vec{p}'$) and reach distant and localized detectors at some moment. We can quantify this expectation by computing the inner product between the out-state $|Sg\rangle$ (the scattering result) and a rotated and time-translated initial two-particle state $|RTg\rangle$: 

$$
\begin{aligned}
\langle RTg|Sg\rangle &= \langle g| e^{+iJ_{y}\theta + iH_{0}\Delta t} S |g\rangle \\
&= \int dE dE' \sum_{\ell,n,\ell',n'} \langle E',\ell',n'| g_{\ell',n'}^{*}(E') g_{\ell,n}(E) \\
&\qquad \times P_{\ell'}(\cos\theta) e^{+iE'\Delta t} e^{+i\chi_{\ell}(E)} |E,\ell,n\rangle.
\end{aligned}
\tag{7}
$$

Here we only consider the rotation around $y$-axis such that the dependence on another angular variable $\phi$ can be ignored. In the large $\ell$ limit,

$$
\langle RTg|Sg\rangle \simeq \int_{0}^{\infty} dE d\ell \int_{0}^{2\pi} \frac{dz}{2\pi} \sum_{n} |g_{\ell,n}(E)|^{2} e^{i\ell\theta\cos z + iE\Delta t + i\chi_{\ell}(E)}.
\tag{8}
$$

So the integrand is indeed rapidly oscillating in the $\ell \to \infty$ limit, and thus the integral is controlled by the saddle point:

$$
\frac{\partial}{\partial z} {\rm phase} = \sin z = 0,
\tag{9}
$$

$$
\frac{\partial}{\partial \ell} {\rm phase} = \theta\cos z + \frac{\partial\chi_{\ell}(E)}{\partial \ell} = 0,
\tag{10}
$$

$$
\frac{\partial}{\partial E} {\rm phase} = \Delta t + \frac{\partial\chi_{\ell}(E)}{\partial E} = 0.
\tag{11}
$$

So the deflection angle, always defined to be positive, is determined by:

$$
\theta = \frac{1}{p} \left| \frac{\partial\chi(E,b)}{\partial b} \right|,
\tag{12}
$$

where we have used $b \equiv \ell/p$. Also, the time delay is:

$$
\Delta t = -\frac{\partial\chi(E,b)}{\partial E}.
\tag{13}
$$

As said, we can extract parameters of a classical trajectory by taking the saddle point, and the phase $\chi(E,b)$ is all we need.

**From the connected amplitude to the phase shift** The next question is how to get the phase shift from the amplitude. From the definition of the connected $2\to 2$ amplitude $\mathcal{M}(E,\theta)$, it is clear that the phase shift is related to $\mathcal{M}(E,\theta)$ through partial-wave expansion: 

$$
e^{i\chi_{\ell}(E)} - 1 = i\mathcal{M}_{\ell}(E) \equiv \frac{1}{N} \int_{-1}^{+1} d\cos\theta\; P_{\ell}(\cos\theta) \times i\mathcal{M}(E,\theta).
\tag{14}
$$

In the large $\ell$ limit, using $P_{\ell}(\cos\theta) \simeq \int_{0}^{2\pi} \frac{dz}{2\pi} e^{i\ell\theta\cos z}$, we find

$$
\mathcal{M}_{\ell}(E) \simeq \frac{1}{N} \int_{-1}^{+1} d\cos\theta \int_{0}^{2\pi} \frac{dz}{2\pi} e^{i\ell\theta\cos z} \mathcal{M}(E,\theta).
\tag{15}
$$

Taking $\theta \simeq q/p$, we get

$$
\mathcal{M}(E,b) = \frac{1}{N p^{2}} \int_{0}^{\infty} dq \cdot q \int_{0}^{2\pi} \frac{dz}{2\pi} e^{ibq\cos z} \mathcal{M}(E,q).
\tag{16}
$$

This integral has a geometric interpretation: The momentum transfer $\vec{q}$ is chosen in the $x$-$y$ plane, $\vec{q} = (1,0,0)q \equiv (\vec{q}_{\perp}, 0)$, so is the impact parameter vector $\vec{b} = (\cos z, \sin z, 0)b \equiv (\vec{b}_{\perp}, 0)$. Then,

$$
\mathcal{M}(E,b) = \frac{2\pi}{N p^{2}} \int \frac{d^{2} \vec{q}_{\perp}}{(2\pi)^{2}} e^{i\vec{b}_{\perp} \cdot \vec{q}_{\perp}} \mathcal{M}(\vec{p}, \vec{q}) = \frac{1}{4E_{\rm CM} p} \int \frac{d^{2} \vec{q}_{\perp}}{(2\pi)^{2}} e^{i\vec{b}_{\perp} \cdot \vec{q}_{\perp}} \mathcal{M}(\vec{p}, \vec{q}),\quad {\rm with}\; \vec{q} = (\vec{q}_{\perp}, 0).
\tag{17}
$$

In words, the impact parameter is the Fourier conjugate of the momentum transfer.

So we have:

$$
e^{i\chi(E,b)} - 1 = \frac{1}{4E_{\rm CM} p} \int \frac{d^{2} \vec{q}_{\perp}}{(2\pi)^{2}} e^{i\vec{b}_{\perp} \cdot \vec{q}_{\perp}} i\mathcal{M}(\vec{p}, \vec{q}),
\tag{18}
$$

and we can expand the both sides to get the phase to leading order in the coupling:

$$
\chi_{0}(E,b) = \frac{1}{4E_{\rm CM} p} \int \frac{d^{2} \vec{q}_{\perp}}{(2\pi)^{2}} e^{i\vec{b}_{\perp} \cdot \vec{q}_{\perp}} \mathcal{M}_{\rm Born}(\vec{p}, \vec{q}).
\tag{19}
$$

**Application** Now, we can apply the above general formula to specific examples. First, taking the amplitude for two charged scalars exchanging one photon: ($m_{1} = m$ and $m_{2} = 0$)

$$
\mathcal{M} = +\frac{4e^{2} Q_{a} Q_{b}}{|\vec{q}|^{2} - i\epsilon} p_{1} \cdot p_{2} = -\frac{4e^{2} Q_{a} Q_{b}}{|\vec{q}|^{2} - i\epsilon} \times \frac{E_{\rm CM}^{2} - m^{2}}{2},
\tag{20}
$$

we get

$$
\chi_{{\rm EM},0}(E,b) = \frac{1}{2(E_{\rm CM}^{2} - m^{2})} \times \left[ -2e^{2} Q_{a} Q_{b} (E_{\rm CM}^{2} - m^{2}) \right] \int_{1/b}^{\infty} \frac{d^{2} \vec{q}_{\perp}}{(2\pi)^{2}} \frac{e^{i\vec{b}_{\perp} \cdot \vec{q}_{\perp}}}{|\vec{q}|^{2} - i\epsilon} = +2\alpha Q_{a} Q_{b} \log\frac{b}{b_{\rm IR}}.
\tag{21}
$$

Next, consider the gravitational scattering between two massive scalars, we have, at the leading order:

$$
\mathcal{M} = \frac{2\kappa^{2}}{q^{2}} \left[ -m_{1}^{2} m_{2}^{2} + 2(p_{1} \cdot p_{2})^{2} \right] \xrightarrow[m_{1}=m]{m_{2}=0} \frac{\kappa^{2}}{q^{2}} (E_{\rm CM}^{2} - m^{2})^{2},
\tag{22}
$$

and the phase shift reads:

$$
\chi_{{\rm G},0} = -2G_{N} (E_{\rm CM}^{2} - m^{2}) \log\frac{b}{b_{\rm IR}}.
\tag{23}
$$

Then, we immediately get the bending angle in CoM frame. For electromagnetic interaction, namely the photon exchange:

$$
\theta = \frac{1}{p} \left| \frac{\partial\chi_{{\rm EM},0}(E,b)}{\partial b} \right| = \frac{2\alpha Q_{a} Q_{b}}{p b}.
\tag{24}
$$

For gravity:

$$
\theta = \frac{1}{p} \left| \frac{\partial\chi_{{\rm G},0}(E,b)}{\partial b} \right| = \frac{4G_{N} E}{b} \xrightarrow{m \gg p} \frac{4G_{N} m}{b}.
\tag{25}
$$

When $m \gg p$, the CoM frame is essentially the lab frame. So this correctly reproduces the bending angle of light.

Also, the time delay can be computed. At leading order in $\alpha$, no time delay appears for EM. For gravity,

$$
\Delta t = -\frac{\partial\chi(E,b)}{\partial E} \simeq +4G_{N} M \log\frac{b}{b_{\rm IR}}.
\tag{26}
$$

This reproduces the famous time delay of light signal. Irwin Shapiro proposed it in 1964 as a test of GR. For light signal near the sun, $\Delta t \sim 4G_{N} M_{\odot} \sim 10^{-4}$ s.

Above we ignored the photon spin. It turns out that the photon spin has no effect on bending angle in the classical limit. Roughly, the photon spin is $\hbar$, and so it produces an effect $\propto \hbar$ and this is unimportant when $J/\hbar \to \infty$. When including quantum corrections, the bending angle can depend on helicity. Then, a photon no longer travels along the geodesic. Roughly, this quantum effect can be attributed to tidal effects on a finite region probed by the loop.

Also, even within the classical regime, there are higher-order contributions to the deflection angle in the form of $(G_{N} M/b)^{n}$ with $n \ge 2$. More careful computations show:

$$
\theta = \frac{4G_{N} m}{b} + \frac{15\pi}{4} \left( \frac{G_{N} m}{b} \right)^{2} + C \left( \frac{G_{N} m}{b} \right)^{2} \times \frac{1}{mb} + \cdots.
\tag{27}
$$

Useful identities: $|\vec{p}| = (E_{\rm CM}^{2} - m^{2})/(2E_{\rm CM})$, $p_{1} \cdot p_{2} = \frac12 (m^{2} - E_{\rm CM}^{2})$,

$$
\int_{1/b}^{\infty} \frac{d^{2} \vec{q}_{\perp}}{(2\pi)^{2}} \frac{e^{i\vec{b}_{\perp} \cdot \vec{q}_{\perp}}}{|\vec{q}|^{2} - i\epsilon} = -\frac{1}{2\pi} \log\frac{b}{b_{\rm IR}}.
$$

Here the second term on the RHS comes from the leading $G_{N}$ correction in the classical limit, which is universal in spin; The third term comes from the leading quantum correction, where the coefficient $C$ depends on spin. Both corrections come from 1-loop graphs, which can be easily seen by counting powers of $G_{N}$, but the classical part $\propto (G_{N} m/b)^{2}$ can be large for realistic system like the bending near a black hole or a neutron star. On the contrary, the quantum correction $\propto (G_{N} m/b)^{2} \times 1/(mb)$ is tiny: For a solar-mass black hole, $(G_{N} m/b)^{2}$ could be $\mathcal{O}(1)$, while $1/(mb) < 1/(G_{N} m^{2}) \sim 10^{-76}$. So, for all practical purposes, quantum corrections can be safely ignored.

**§2 Gravitational Light-by-Light Scattering**

Finally, let us briefly look at the long-range gravitational force between two photons, namely the gravitational light-by-light scattering. This process may not have any practical relevance; We discuss it purely out of curiosity.

For photon-photon scattering, there are two distinct possibilities: the two initial photons being either parallel or antiparallel. The parallel case is special because we cannot boost ourselves to their COM frame. A simple use of 4-momentum conservation shows that if $\vec{p}_{1} \parallel \vec{p}_{2}$, then $\vec{p}_{1} \parallel \vec{p}_{2} \parallel \vec{p}'_{1} \parallel \vec{p}'_{2}$, and thus $s = t = u = 0$. Now, since the amplitude $\mathcal{M}$ involves at least one power of $G_{N}$ (tree-level), $[\mathcal{M}] = 0$ means that $\mathcal{M} \sim \mathcal{O}(s,t,u)$ and so must vanish identically when $s = t = u = 0$. So:

**Two parallel beams of light do not feel gravitational attraction from each other.**

Intuitively, it can be understood as the exact cancellation between the attractive gravity between two energy densities and the repulsive gravity between two parallel energy flows in the $v \to 1$ limit.

The fact that two parallel light beams do not attract each other has long been known in GR by solving the metric of a pencil of light and then the null geodesic with such a background metric. It is nice that we recover this conclusion by simple kinematic argument without any calculation. Moreover, our analysis shows the existence of an exactly soluble two-body system in GR.

For all non-parallel beams, we can always boost ourselves to their CoM frame so that the initial two photons are antiparallel and have the same energy. In this frame, the amplitude is easily obtained by gluing two photon-photon-graviton amplitudes in the $t \to 0$ limit:

$$
\mathcal{M}(1^{+}, 2^{+}, 3^{-}, 4^{-}) \xrightarrow{t\to 0} \frac{\kappa^{2}}{t} [12]^{2} \langle 34 \rangle^{2},
\tag{28}
$$

Using $[12]\langle 34 \rangle = 4\vec{p}^{2}$, we get

$$
\mathcal{M}(1^{+}, 2^{+}, 3^{-}, 4^{-}) \xrightarrow{t\to 0} \frac{16\kappa^{2} p^{4}}{t}.
\tag{29}
$$

Then the corresponding phase shift is

$$
\chi_{0} = -\frac{\kappa^{2} p^{2}}{\pi} \log\frac{b}{b_{\rm IR}},
\tag{30}
$$

and the bending angle is

$$
\theta = \frac{1}{p} \left| \frac{\partial\chi}{\partial b} \right| = \frac{8G_{N} p}{b}.
\tag{31}
$$

This is twice of the deflection angle by a heavy point mass if we identify $p$ with $m$.

Intuitively, this can be thought of as from an additional attractive force between antiparallel mass current.

Another fun fact about this result is that it is exact in GR expansion: Classical bending angle of light by light is tree-level exact and receives no loop corrections. We will discuss how loop correction contributes to classical observables in the next lecture.

**Exercise**

(1) In this lecture, we have considered the light bending by a point mass (such as the sun) due to gravitation. In principle, the light can also be bent by a heavy charged particle, say a proton, due to electromagnetic interaction. Of course, this does not happen at the leading order of the electromagnetic coupling $e$ (namely $\mathcal{O}(e^{2})$). Please determine at which power does electromagnetic interaction first cause a nonzero bending angle.

(2) Following (1), please determine the functional form of the bending angle $\Delta\theta$ of photon by a proton. That is, please show how $\Delta\theta$ depends on various parameters and fundamental constants in question. You don't need to determine the overall pure-number coefficient.

**Comments on References**

Our eikonal treatment of light bending closely follows [1]. The bending angle to higher order in $G_{N}$ and in $\hbar$ was studied in various works. See, e.g., [2]. The gravitational light-by-light scattering was discussed in the context of GR in Chap. VIII of [3] and in the context of amplitudes by [4].

**References**

[1] B. Bellazzini, G. Isabella, and M. M. Riva, "Classical vs quantum eikonal scattering and its causal structure," *JHEP* **04** (2023) 023, arXiv:2211.00085 [hep-th].

[2] N. E. J. Bjerrum-Bohr, J. F. Donoghue, B. R. Holstein, L. Planté, and P. Vanhove, "Bending of Light in Quantum Gravity," *Phys. Rev. Lett.* **114** no. 6, (2015) 061301, arXiv:1410.7590 [hep-th].

[3] R. C. Tolman, *Relativity, thermodynamics, and cosmology*. Oxford at the Clarendon Press, 1934.

[4] B. M. Barker, M. S. Bhatia, and S. N. Gupta, "Gravitational scattering of light by light," *Phys. Rev.* **158** (Jun, 1967) 1498–1499.